Right then. The interviewer is Catherine McShane and this is an interview for the Cardiff Carnival
25th Anniversary Heritage Project. I'm here with Jude Thilburn Price and it's the 15th
of October 2014. Could you spell your name just for the recording? All of it? Yes please.
Jude, J-U-D-E, Thilburn, T-H-O-B-U-R-N hyphen Price, P-R-I-C-E. Great, thank you. And we're
in Trowbridge in Cardiff. That's right. And so, I'd just like to ask you, how did you
get involved in Cardiff Carnival? I used to get involved a long time ago when it used to be the
Lord Murs Parade. They used to be going on in Cardiff. I used to go with my nan to the church
halls and they'd be working for ages. It seemed making different things. The lorries would turn
up on Friday and everyone would start decorating the lorries for the float. So, my involvement
with the parade through Cardiff has been a lifelong thing. I didn't do anything for a long time
and I dragged Ray down one year to see Dragon down by the Millennium Centre and he was at a
night show which he was quite taken with. I said to him, do you fancy having a go next year
for Carnival? And he said, we'd give it a go. So, we'd come down for the launch night
and from there then we got involved with it. And that's how we came to do it. It was something
I'd always wanted to do but I'd never quite got round to getting to Carnival Camp because I'd
always been working. But when I retired, got retired from work, then obviously I had time to come and
have a dabble. So, we brought our large puppet making skills with us. So, you started with making
large puppets? Well, I'd always made puppets and big structures and costumes and animation and done
film and performance. So, we brought with us the skills, if you like, for making big puppets and
that was the year that we had Queen Elizabeth to do and a lot of the other big wings, big structures
as well. So, that was quite an interesting experience. Interesting in what way? Well, we
went for the one week's, we signed up to do the one week's training but unfortunately the people
that were teaching it could only stay for the week. And we had a bit of a list of to-dos then
for the following two weeks to make sure that everything was made and constructed
for dressing so that it could go out for Carnival. So, we spent another two weeks
full-time really down there to make everything we needed to go for the day. Otherwise people
wouldn't have had stuff to wear and to do anything with. So, what were they made out of? Mostly
aluminium, fibre pole, what else? All different fabrics were put on them.
Some latexing was done for unscrimming for hands and large faces.
I did quite enjoy making all the big hands. They were quite nice to see them all sort of
stood on the desk. These like five times hands drying out everywhere. They were quite good and
spraying them out on the sticks was a laugh. Rigging it all up was quite good though. I did
enjoy rigging them all up and seeing everything moving on the day was a nice thing to see.
So, how many have you done since then? Let's see,
four. I think we've done four since then. So, different things each year.
Have you got a favourite?
I quite like this year's when we were all different puppets, when we weren't big structures
to wear through. I was mostly down to my health that I wasn't like 10 to 15 foot tall
to manoeuvre things about. But we had nice big heads this year and the baby came and she was a
sausage so we did a punch and duty set loosely based on the muppets. But the kids enjoyed it so
that's all that mattered. Only the thing was it was raining all the way round and the costumes
were getting heavier and heavier as they absorbed the water. It's part of the thing. The other
ones we've been rained on quite a few times. But I don't know, it's one of those things. You've
worked so hard for the time leading up to it. It's the finale, isn't it? If it rains, it rains
you get wet. So, it'd be a shame not to take it all out after you've spent months working on something.
So, you spend months on it rather than the three weeks?
Yeah, I've spent like a long time making what we make to go out.
So, yeah, we'll start planning what to make for next year now.
Any ideas?
Well, I do quite like Day of the Dead and I do quite like the big cat arenas. The skeleton's a
little dressed with the big hats. I've had a couple of people say they're interested in
being a section with those so that's one possibility. I can't think, I did think of
something else. I can't think of what it was now but it'll probably change a couple of times by then
anyway. So, is it the making part of Carnival that you're most interested in or is it the
performing? I enjoy the making although I don't say I relish it while I'm sat up at two and three
o'clock in the morning sewing or sticking and gluing and you can't get through the house because
it's full of bits of puppet and structure and stuff like that. So, that can be a bit of a nightmare.
I do enjoy taking them out and performing them because it's the only way to see how things work
and make notes for future builds and stuff like that. So, it's always good to perform something
you've made as a prop maker because you get to see how it functions then because a lot of the time
it's very rare you'll make the same thing twice. I don't think I've ever made the same thing twice
in all my life. So, it's always like you might use different ways of then constructing the inside
for next year but the actual outside of whatever it's going to be might be completely different
but you sort of change how you rig something up maybe by being able to wear it. So, it gives
you a lot of insight from the performer's point of view that you then use like when we're commissioned
to do work for other people. So, it's always good to try your stuff.
And obviously you've performed in the rain. Yeah, quite a few number of times.
And you mentioned the little ones. Yeah, well they like, my grandchildren like doing it.
Um, Reese came about three years ago. He wanted to be an electric eel. I don't know why,
just one of those things the little boys wanted to be. Ellie was a mermaid. That year we made the
smallest car in the floating the world which was basically a cut down supermarket trolley,
no names mentioned, and a car seat so because she can't walk very fast so we made a little
trolley that we towed on the back of our disability scooter with the giant mermaid on.
So, that was their first carnival and even though it did rain a bit on them they did like it so they
they wanted to do it since. So, I can't remember what they were last year but this year they were
Ellie wanted to be the dog from the Muppet so we made a wolf head and
bodysuit and Reese was Kermit the Frog done as the crocodile from the Punch and Judy.
We went as Waldorf and Statler Punch and Judy and little Abby she's only four she wanted to be a
sausage so we made her. Yeah, you know, but it gives you a chance so you can be anything you like
really, as long as you've got glitter on it. It's a goer. But yeah, we're looking at wheels and stuff
for next year just in case we want to go large again but depends on my health like
so whether we can actually manage to perform large structures now I might have to scale them down to
like eight foot. That's still big. Yes, it's not as big as like you know the others but yeah maybe
scale things down to our eight foot for next year and see what we come up with.
But yeah, see what the kids want to be and work from there and work from there up. Yeah, you
normally get like two potato drawings with some arms and legs in unusual places with their
description of what they want to be and then you have to like you know work from that.
Oh, is it a challenge? Yeah, it is a bit but it's always worth seeing their faces when you've made
their costumes and all their stuff and they've been trying them on as you've been making them
they've been in and out the conservatories was sewing and sticking and gluing and what have you
and the little it's like Christmas morning you know when their costumes made and they've got it on
so they do like they do like doing it and sometimes if they've seen their friends as
they're going around they give them a little wave although this year they was too busy getting
drowned. I think this year was the worst weather we've experienced. The other the other years it's
rained before we've gone out and it's been all right you know as we've done going around but
god it was wet this year. Yeah carnival in Wales. And as we had a bit of foam and sponge and stuff
used in our costumes we were just soaking the water up all the way round. It took three weeks
to dry off with the dehumidifier in the conservatory. The heads and I can put them away now.
It took three weeks to dry the foam out. There we go memories.
Were there any other memorable moments from your carnivals over the last few years?
When we were when we were making Queen Elizabeth to go out the other year
a couple years ago Ray had to be Queen Elizabeth because it was quite a heavy structure to
um to wear and for the time of going out like you got the time of the lineup so that's about
an hour you stood in it then you got your like walk around plus the little stops used to be so
you used to have to be work out that you were in for about two and a half to three hours.
It was such a heavy structure Ray had to do that one but when we went out the back of the channel
view to have a look at it and test it for blowing over and stuff like that see how stable it was.
We noticed Caroline, Sian and I that his trainers didn't match his dress so we had to go looking
for a pair of beige trainers then that would match his frock for carnival day because they
just clashed with the ones he had so he had a new pair of trainers out of that and he'd done quite
well this year he had a new pair to go with his Punch and Duty striped trousers and a new pair
of blue trainers so obviously Ray gets a new pair of trainers every time we go out and do carnival
so yeah that was that was quite good um the feeling of relief when I took that
costume off that that huge structure yeah that was worth it I couldn't walk for days after then
and the bruises bruises were horrific from carrying such large packs but um it was worth it
you came back for more yeah it was worth it though because when you go up and you sneak behind people
when you got big hands and then you put your hand around them and people like to have their photos
taken with you so you go stand you stand in the photo so you're huge and they just like lots of
people uh want to come up and have a photo taken so you've got to catch up to where you were then
you know in the in the line on the line somewhere so you've lost your place because you've stopped
so many times for people to have their photos done I know Ray like scared in the crowd with
his big hands and stuff so yeah it's a good laugh I prefer to perform them and they do something
than just walk about doing nothing with them you know they got to have a little life with their own
wallet out is uh is best yeah something to play with yeah and it's a bit more interactive for
the crowd there and they seem to appreciate it you know when you give them a poke with a big arm
or something always makes them laugh makes a couple shriek yeah but yeah makes a lot of kids
cry when they see oh I don't like the big heads so yeah it's a laugh so yeah being as Reese and
Ellie are bigger now we might get them to wear a big puppet well would be a big puppet for them so
it might be about five foot but it's still in relation to their size quite uh big
because Reese's uh then backpack puppets now for a couple of years so he's uh
uh you can take a bigger structure this year after giving me his wheat a bit so
but uh yeah they enjoy you know so it's worth doing for that
it's nice to go down carnival camp as well and see your everyone down there um and chat to them
and see what they're making we help a lot of people make their structures help them with um
um all the mechanics of things uh their structure um problem solving with them so that's you know
it's always nice to see everyone's stuff finished and out out and about and knowing like all the
blood sweat and tears are going into making things uh but yeah it's a nice it's a nice day out
um apart from the rain of course but can't can't have everything can you so yeah
oh thank you very much oh thank you for having us over